Docs: policy for supported tools and dependencies (#7859)
readthedocs/readthedocs.org: docs/supported-tools.rst

Read the Docs supports two tools to build your documentation:
`Sphinx <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/>`__ and `MkDocs <https://www.mkdocs.org/>`__.
In order to provide :doc:`several features </features>`,
Read the Docs needs to inject or modify some content while building your docs.

When an incompatible change happens in one of these tools or dependencies,
we need to change our code as well to keep our features working,
this is done with backwards compatibility in mind.
But sometimes is hard to keep compatibility with old and new versions at the same time,
in order to continue moving forward on future development and features we need to drop support for some versions.

.. note::

   Your existent documentation will always be kept online and working,
   But **when support for a tool or dependency ends, new builds may fail**.

.. contents:: Contents
   :local:
   :depth: 3

End of support policy
---------------------

Our policy defines how long a given tool or dependency is considered supported.
After it reaches its end of support date,
we don't offer support for builds/docs using these tools or dependencies,
you'll need to upgrade in order to receive support.

> For :doc:`/commercial/index` we provide an extended support of six months after the official end of support date.

Author: I find it easier to read a single number in words when it's inside a sentence.

.. note::

   In order to keep your builds reproducible,
   it's highly recommended declaring its dependencies and versions explicitly.

   .. TODO: link to this guide once it's written https://github.com/readthedocs/readthedocs.org/issues/7852.

External dependencies (Python)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These are the dependencies that are installed by default when using a Python environment:

Sphinx:
  Projects created before Oct 20, 2020 use ``1.8.x``.
  New projects use the latest version.

Mkdocs:
  Projects created before April 3, 2019 (April 23, 2019 for :doc:`/commercial/index`) use ``0.17.3``.
  New projects use the latest version.

sphinx-rtd-theme:
  Projects created before October 20, 2020 (January 21, 2021 for :doc:`/commercial/index`) use ``0.4.3``.
  New projects use the latest version.

pip:
  Latest version by default.

setuptools:
  Latest version by default.

mock:
  ``1.0.1`` (could be removed in the future).

pillow:
  ``5.4.1`` (could be removed in the future).

alabaster:
  ``0.7.x`` (could be removed in the future).

commonmark:
  ``0.8.1`` (could be removed in the future).

recommonmark:

>   ``0.5.0`` (could be removed in the future).

Author: I think we should put all these under a feature flag to stop installing them on new projects.

Reviewer: I agree.

Reviewer 2: I think we should remove all these optional ones at the same date for new projects.

External dependencies (Conda)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These are the dependencies that are installed by default when using a Conda environment:

Conda:
   Miniconda2 ``4.6.14``

>    (could be updated to use the latest version by default).

Author: I think we can start sampling more projects to use `update_conda_at_startup`, we have noticed that this solves some OOM errors, and it's faster :)

Reviewer: Yeah. However, we have found also that sometimes a conda upgrade broke the build. So, there is some tradeoff here.

I think the best solution here is to continue the path towards `mamba`.

Author: I don't think we should push to mamba as a replacement for conda, it should be an option. We already update pip on each build, if conda breaks is probably temporary and not so usual.

Reviewer: It's true we update `pip`. However, `pip` is way more stable than `conda` in our experience :smile:

Reviewer: Another difference between upgrading pip and conda is that conda takes _a lot_ of time to update.

>    (could be updated to use the latest version by default).

Reviewer: It's not clear here "why it could be updated?". I think it should mention that it could be "updated on user request" or similar.

Author: This is a suggestion to start updating conda on each build.

Mkdocs:
  Latest version by default installed via ``conda``.

Sphinx:
  Latest version by default installed via ``conda``.

sphinx-rtd-theme:

>   Latest version by default installed via ``conda``.

Reviewer: We may mention these come from `conda-forge` channel.

Author: we don't set any explicit channel when adding these deps

Reviewer: Oh, we probably should then. The default channel usually has old versions. We will end up with different versions installed if you use `pip` than if you use `conda`.

For example, https://pypi.org/project/sphinx-rtd-theme/ latest version is 0.5.1 and we are currently installing 0.4.3 (https://readthedocs.org/projects/time-test/builds/12859408/)

Author: not sure if we control on publishing to conda (either the default or forge), I think the safest way is to install via pip the theme at least.

Reviewer: We don't have control on `default` but we do on `conda-forge`.

I'm not sure how safe it is to mix `conda` and `pip` in the same environment or if it's recommended or not. We may need to do some research here before installing a package by default using `pip` in a `conda` environment.

Reviewer: @astrojuanlu is it 100% safe to mix conda and pip in the same environment?

Reviewer 3: As far as I understand, no it's not 100 % safe. However, I don't know if we are at 98 %, 99.9 %, or just 100 % and we can stop worrying about this.

I just did this quick test: I tried `mamba install "sphinx<3.5"` on a new conda environment and then `pip install -U sphinx` to see what would happen. Result: pip uninstalled the old Sphinx version (surprising! I think this could not be done in the past, perhaps it changed after https://github.com/conda/conda/issues/7053 was closed), detected that the rest of the dependencies were in place (👍🏽), then pip-installed the newest Sphinx version, and finally it looks like `sphinx-quickstart` just works.

```
$ conda list | grep -i sphinx
sphinx                    3.5.3                    pypi_0    pypi
sphinxcontrib-applehelp   1.0.2                      py_0    conda-forge
sphinxcontrib-devhelp     1.0.2                      py_0    conda-forge
sphinxcontrib-htmlhelp    1.0.3                      py_0    conda-forge
sphinxcontrib-jsmath      1.0.1                      py_0    conda-forge
sphinxcontrib-qthelp      1.0.3                      py_0    conda-forge
sphinxcontrib-serializinghtml 1.1.4                      py_0    conda-forge
```

I will ask in the conda-forge community.

Reviewer 3: https://matrix.to/#/!dUtrSrxSudChYWSwjL:gitter.im/$XfuNmdhoZhl2SR9_5Xx8189DjIjciL2mITUlUvYQh1I?via=gitter.im&via=matrix.org for future reference

Reviewer 3: It turns out I asked in the wrong room 🤦🏽 https://matrix.to/#/!SOyumkgPRWoXfQYIFH:matrix.org/$1619164399102681JsZJt:matrix.org?via=gitter.im&via=matrix.org

mock:
  Latest version by default installed via ``pip`` (could be removed in the future).

pillow:
  Latest version by default installed via ``pip`` (could be removed in the future).

recommonmark:
  Latest version by default installed via ``conda`` (could be removed in the future).

Internal dependencies
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Internal dependencies are needed to integrate your docs with Read the Docs.
We guarantee that these dependencies will work with all current supported versions of our tools,
you don't need to specify them in your requirements.

- readthedocs-sphinx-ext

Table of supported versions
---------------------------

Sphinx
~~~~~~

> Sphinx releases its versions incrementally.

Reviewer: I don't think this sentence (similar to MkDocs one) adds value here. We can remove it or move it to the high level section in a more generic way: "The following tables show the supported versions for the major external dependencies we use together with their end of support date"

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Version

>      - Released / Latest Update

Reviewer: This should be split in 2 columns instead of separating them via `/`.

     - Supported Until

   * - ``3.x``
     - Apr 5, 2020 / ???

>      - 5.0 is released or later/early

Reviewer: What does "or later/early" mean? It seems like we don't really know :smile:

Author: This is a date that isn't decided yet, but are aiming to 5.0, but something can happen, and we should be ready to stop supporting this version or keep supporting it.

Reviewer: This should be clarified in some manner in the policy.

   * - ``2.x``
     - Mar 28, 2019 / Mar 5, 2020
     - 4.0 is released or later/early

   * - ``1.8.x``
     - Sep 12, 2018 / Mar 10, 2019
     - Nov 31, 2022

   * - ``1.7.x``
     - Feb 12, 2018 / Sep 5, 2018
     - Nov 31, 2022

   * - ``1.6.x``
     - May 16, 2017 / Feb 4, 2017
     - Nov 31, 2021

   * - ``1.5.x``
     - Dec 5, 2016 / May 4, 2017
     - Nov 31, 2021

   * - ``<= 1.4.x``
     - Mar 21, 2008 / Nov 23, 2016
     - Unsupported

Mkdocs
~~~~~~

MkDocs releases its versions incrementally.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Version
     - Released / Latest Update
     - Supported Until

   * - ``1.1.x``
     - Feb 22, 2020 / ???
     - 3.0 released or later/early

   * - ``1.0.x``
     - Aug 3, 2018 / Sep 17, 2018
     - 2.0 released or later/early

   * - ``0.17.x``
     - Oct 19, 2017 / Jul 6, 2018
     - Nov 31, 2021

   * - ``0.16.x``
     - Nov 4, 2017 / Apr 4, 2017
     - Nov 31, 2021

   * - ``0.15.x``
     - Jan 21 2016 / Feb 18, 2016
     - Nov 31, 2021

   * - ``<= 0.14.x``
     - Jan 11, 2014 / Jun 9, 2015
     - Unsupported

Python
~~~~~~

> Python defines an EOL (End Of Life) date for all its versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Python defines an EOL date for all its versions.
```

If we use the `term`, we already introduced the concept earlier.

> Python defines an EOL (End Of Life) date for all its versions.

Reviewer: I think this sentence needs something else, like

```suggestion
Python defines an EOL date for all its versions and we add 6 extra months of support on top of that.
```

However, promise supporting a version of Python after the official EOL date doesn't look good to me. I would prefer if we stick with the official date here: _it could continue working, but we don't compromise ourselves_

Author: We only offer 6 months for commercial, 3 months after the EOL in general.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Version
     - EOL Date
     - Supported Until

   * - ``3.9.x`` (not available yet)
     - Oct 05, 2025
     - Jan 31, 2026

   * - ``3.8.x``
     - Oct 14, 2024
     - Jan 31, 2025

   * - ``3.7.x``
     - Jun 27, 2023
     - Sep 31, 2023

   * - ``3.6.x``
     - Dec 23, 2021
     - Mar 31, 2022

   * - ``3.5.x``
     - Sep 13, 2020
     - Nov 31, 2021

   * - ``2.7.x``
     - Jan 01, 2020

>      - Nov 31, 2021

Author: This is overdue... but we didn't have this policy before... so

Reviewer 2: It's also a huge change, and will likely still lead to a lot of yelling.

Supported Tools and Dependencies
================================

Read the Docs supports two tools to build your documentation:
`Sphinx <https://www.sphinx-doc.org/>`__ and `MkDocs <https://www.mkdocs.org/>`__.
In order to provide :doc:`several features </features>`,
Read the Docs needs to inject or modify some content while building your docs.

When an incompatible change happens in one of these tools or dependencies,
we need to change our code as well to keep our features working.
This is done with backwards compatibility in mind,
but sometimes is hard to keep compatibility with old and new versions at the same time.
In order to continue moving forward on future development and features,
we need to drop support for some versions.

.. note::

   Your existent documentation will always be kept online and working,
   but **when support for a tool or dependency ends, new builds may fail**.

.. contents:: Contents
   :local:
   :depth: 3

End of support policy
---------------------

Our policy defines how long a given tool or dependency is considered supported.

> Read the Docs will contact all users when an end of support date is close,

Author: For python I think we can do it, for the other versions is complicated yeah, maybe just communicate this in our newsletter now that we have one :D

> Read the Docs will contact all users when an end of support date is close,
> after that date your builds may start failing and you will need to upgrade in order to receive support.

Reviewer 4: @humitos wouldn't you say that this is possible?

```suggestion
Read the Docs will share advice when a end date for support is known.
If detection of tool usage is possible, users will be contacted directly.
After the end date, your builds may start failing and you will need to upgrade or change the tool in order to receive support.
```

Reviewer: Yeah, we are tracking "all packages installed in the virtualenv" now. So, if we want, we could contact "all users building their docs with `Sphinx==3.2.1`"

--------------------

We install some dependencies in order to build your project without specifying their dependencies.
In the past we used to set these dependencies to a specific version and update them after some time,
but by doing so would break some builds and new projects wouldn't be able to use a new version by default.
For this reason we are now installing their latest version (or latest supported version) by default.

.. note::

   In order to keep your builds reproducible,
   it's highly recommended declaring its dependencies and versions explicitly.
   See :doc:`/guides/reproducible-builds`.

External dependencies (Python)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

These are the dependencies that are installed by default when using a Python environment:

Sphinx:
  Projects created before Oct 20, 2020 use ``1.8.x``.
  New projects use the latest version.

Mkdocs:
  Projects created before April 3, 2019 (April 23, 2019 for :doc:`/commercial/index`) use ``0.17.3``.
  Projects created before March 9, 2021 use ``1.0.4``.
  New projects use the latest version.

sphinx-rtd-theme:
  Projects created before October 20, 2020 (January 21, 2021 for :doc:`/commercial/index`) use ``0.4.3``.

>   New projects use the latest version.

Author: I'm not sure about not installing the theme in the future as well. Like, it's an external dependency, but it's a "core" product as well.

Reviewer 5: Not installing it means fixing the “what happened?” issue when you find out that the rendering of your documentation locally does not match what Read The Docs show.

However, it’s a great theme, and if it’s not installed by default, it will be somewhat harder for people to discover it, or at least it will become less popular due to people tending to leave whatever is default.

Author: @Gallaecio we are trying to do less "magic" for users in favor of being more explicit and having reproducible builds locally. In this case users would need to add the theme to their requirements, we would update or add guides to help users with this.

pip:
  Latest version by default.

setuptools:

>   Latest version by default.

Reviewer: I just found out that this is required for Python 3.9 (#7885).

Using the version `41.0.1` (current) it fails when installing `mock==1.0.1` dependency.

We have a feature flag, `INSTALL_LATEST_SETUPOOLS` that works as a workaround for now, tho.

Author: This is already by default now.

mock:
  ``1.0.1`` (could be removed in the future).

pillow:
  ``5.4.1`` (could be removed in the future).

alabaster:
  ``0.7.x`` (could be removed in the future).

commonmark:
  ``0.8.1`` (could be removed in the future).

recommonmark:
  ``0.5.0`` (could be removed in the future).

External dependencies (Conda)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> These are the dependencies that are installed by default when using a Conda environment:

Reviewer 4: Has any of this changed?

Conda:
   Miniconda2 ``4.6.14``
   (could be updated in the future to use the latest version by default).

Mkdocs:
  Latest version by default installed via ``conda``.

Sphinx:
  Latest version by default installed via ``conda``.

sphinx-rtd-theme:
  Latest version by default installed via ``conda``.

mock:
  Latest version by default installed via ``pip`` (could be removed in the future).

pillow:
  Latest version by default installed via ``pip`` (could be removed in the future).

recommonmark:
  Latest version by default installed via ``conda`` (could be removed in the future).

Internal dependencies
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Internal dependencies are needed to integrate your docs with Read the Docs.
We guarantee that these dependencies will work with all current supported versions of our tools,
you don't need to specify them in your requirements.

> - readthedocs-sphinx-ext

Reviewer 2: This should link to the repo.

Table of supported versions
---------------------------

Sphinx
~~~~~~

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Version
     - Released
     - Latest Update
     - Supported Until

   * - ``3.x``
     - Apr 5, 2020
     - \???
     - 5.0 is released or later/early

   * - ``2.x``
     - Mar 28, 2019
     - Mar 5, 2020
     - 4.0 is released or later/early

   * - ``1.8.x``
     - Sep 12, 2018
     - Mar 10, 2019

>      - Nov 31, 2022

Reviewer 6: Just noting for others: this date is dependent on deprecating Python 2.7 first. Sphinx>=2 requires Python>=3.5. A year seems like a good amount of lead time for projects to make the switch.

   * - ``1.7.x``
     - Feb 12, 2018
     - Sep 5, 2018

>      - Nov 31, 2022

Reviewer 2: Are these the .org or .com EOL? We should probably keep them the same, TBH, and just handle case-by-case users as we need to.

Author: These are .org. I'm fine having the same date. I was thinking more about support requests than compatibility support.
